ultimately the product is not what's for
lunch the product is not what's for
dinner the product is you the question
is not what is the plastic package snack
you're going to buy today the question
is what kind of person are you going to
be what kind of person are you going to
become what kind of difference are you
aspiring to make in the world and what
are you willing to sacrifice to make
that happen in this video I'm going to
disagree with the vegan lass on the
topic of production of palm oil
what palm oil and related sources of
deforestation mean for vegans ethically
politically etc in the year 2016
two disclaimers first as I've said
recently in videos and as I may say
again the prospect of politics
absolutely relies on us being able to
disagree without making enemies out of
each other so obviously this is not a
hate video directed towards Lauren
there's no personal conflict between us
whatsoever in terms of the drama
demi-monde here it wasn't that long ago
that people were saying on the internet
that Lauren and I were an item that we
were involved romantically
despite the geographic distance between
us i I don't know if I could love anyone
enough to move to Scotland that would be
a oh my god it's now it's going to
happen right now I'm gonna fall in love
with somebody in Scotland and move move
back to Glasgow man my skin my skin
crawls of the thought moving back to
Scotland but people say it's gotten
better people say it's got a lot better
since I used to be there if we have to
be able to talk about issues not just
issues were relaxed about and
comfortable talking about and familiar
with but exactly the issues we are most
passionate about we need to be able to
talk about them without making friends
into enemies without creating undue
hostility without resorting to you know
gross personal insults and defamation we
have to that's what politics requires
politics is easy when nobody cares about
the issue it's exactly when you care
passionately when you don't have your ID
jab to objectivity we've lost track of
what's an objective fact with route
that's when it's difficult Duggan
politics and that's what we got to talk
about as vegans and otherwise disclaimer
number two it's certainly peculiar for
me that engaging with this issue and
with so many others I end up kind of
representing political science where I
say look my background in political
science real
gives me an advantage to understand this
issue it's a strange irony for me
because I hate political science as an
academic discipline I spend a lot of my
time complaining about a lamenting that
I have this diploma that's useless it
can't get me any job
political science diploma from Canada is
totally worthless and definitely you
know the state of the discipline within
Canada is parlous at best it's a
disaster
political science Canada political
science may be better in Germany or
Ireland or where you're watching this
video as a discipline like it's it's not
that easy to generalize about from one
country to the next but definitely in
Canada it's a complete disaster and most
of what I learned in in that discipline
is really despite what was going on in
the university not because of what was
going on University so it's not like I
can say to you political science is a
wonderful subject if only more people
would study political science they'd be
able to see things my way not true at
all I encourage you to major political
science definitely not in Canada
give a look this issue making claims
about deforestation and the effects of
consuming palm oil and then the you know
ethical question of whether or not palm
oil is vegan whether or not vegans
should basically be active as supposing
the production consumption of palm oil
these arguments rely on extrapolation
and many people including many vegans
are uncomfortable with extrapolation as
such they feel that it's somehow a fake
statistic when they're looking at
extrapolation and I saw this a great
deal back when it was in vogue to
discuss in debate some of the shocking
claims that vegans made about the
percentage of air pollution that was
reduced the percentage of land use that
was improved the percentage of water
pollution that was reduced by
eliminating meat agriculture so most
those concern about the United States
that were not about Europe but they must
there must be similar statistical claims
for Europe but where different
foundations had crunched the numbers and
figured out what percentage of for
example air pollution would be mitigated
improved to reduced by eliminating meat
agriculture and many other knock-on
effects now those claims relied on
extrapolation what we mean by that it
means that you don't look at the map and
simply color in the areas that are
currently devoted to meat production and
then delete them you can't you know
replace them with a white gap as if
within the United States that pollution
just cease to exist and nothing would
replace it you have to extrapolate what
would the land be used for if it were
not being used to produce feed for
animals or you know to slaughter the
animals or for the all the different
stages of the meat industry the leather
industry etc so that adds up to a lot of
land use a lot of air pollution land
water pollution all the different stages
of that industry it's a lot of math but
the point is you can't just delete that
number and replace it with zero as if
the meat industry and its associated
stage-by-stage industries along the
supply chain as if it would be replaced
by nothing right Suman likewise when
you're looking at a particular impetus
for deforestation a particular industry
or crop like palm oil you can't say oh
well if this wasn't a palm oil there
would just be nothing there would be
zero negative impact the environment it
would be replaced by something and in
general you're going to use a profile of
the non-meat land uses that are likely
to replace it given the location given
the climate and given a few other
economic factors now one of the clearest
examples of this back when I was a kid
there were many I guess it's a phony
political science claims about of
smoking and how much money the
government would save if people just
stopped smoking cigarettes so when these
claims were phony is when they lacked
extrapolation right so this is why
extrapolation is so important there used
to be newspapers that would say look
this is how much money the government
spends on smoking related deaths
so there's also smoking related
illnesses etc etc but just to keep this
simple let's just say deaths okay so
people dying of smoking related
illnesses
cost the government so many millions of
dollars every year and then the
newspapers would say oh so the
government could save all this money
because that will be reduced to zero if
people just quit smoking now it would
not be reduced to zero the point is you
have to you can't replace it with a
blank you can't replace it with a zero
you need to fill in the gap with some
kind of disease profile for all the
other forms of mortality that those
people would experience that the
government would have costs for if they
were not smoking cigarettes so for
example uh people died in car accidents
people die of heart disease many many
other cause
you can't replace the cost of the
smoking related deaths with nothing you
have to come up with some abstract some
extrapolation some set of predictions
about how many people would die of how
many other causes and what those cost
would be to the government in contrast
to the cigarette related deaths right uh
the same thing is true if you're looking
at land use for growing rubber if you
were not planting rubber there that
doesn't mean that the land would become
a Forest Preserve it just doesn't that's
just ridiculous it also doesn't mean
that the ecological impact would be zero
uh with any you know jungle crop with
any crop in that climate whether it's
palm oil or rubber or frankly rice you
know you can cut down the forest and
grow rice if you say this one crop is
responsible for why the forest is being
cut down you then have to come up with
some kind of extrapolation for okay well
what if nobody was consuming palm oil
they would be farming a different kind
of oil to replace it there's a
substitute there you have to deal with
and geographically on the map if they
were not farming palm oil in this place
what would they be farming so where I
was in Southeast Asia there was at that
time a lot of forces being cut down
replaced with rubber rubber plantations
so if we use the same line of thinking
you know failing to extrapolate failing
to really think about this Durance
political science you could very easily
come to the conclusion Oh vegans should
refuse to use rubber because rubber cuts
down the forest and then once you cut
down the forest you kill the orangutans
and you kill the Tigers and you kill the
elephants all this horrible impact
happens from from from deforestation and
this is being done for rubber now before
they were planting rubber on those
places they were planting other crops
there were other basically fad economic
theories people thought they would get
rich from planting teak wood there was a
time when people were planting opium
talking about Laos Cambodia etc when
they were cutting shale forest in order
to farm opium and I have read articles
for people who really argued that opium
farming was better for the environment
that rubber farming and so on there were
especially anthropologists really liked
that kind of art
where they argue in favor of kind of
traditional subsistence lifestyles or
whatever traditional drug-dealing
lifestyles um there were a lot of
debates around that is rubber actually
worse than the other crops that people
could be trying to make money out of but
the fundamental question here of land
use is actually not going to be
addressed at all by vilifying the one
crop or pretending that if people did
not farm that crop they would farm
nothing or that the land would be
returned to a pristine forest
environment or even more expensive that
these governments would devote money to
making habitat conservation schemes on a
huge scale like as if Malaysia is going
to replace its entire palm oil industry
or its entire rubber industry both are
huge crops because the same climate etc
with enormous National Park System
that's just ridiculous
right so you have to extrapolate what
land use would replace the farming of
palm oil or the farming of rubber or
whatever the issue is that you're
choosing so I do not believe that vegans
should vilify rubber or or or palm oil
the other thing you have to understand
is economically for all of these
countries if you're talking about real
for us generally intact forest then
deforestation economically is an end in
itself the might a lot of money is made
from cutting down the forest and other
projects are often pursued as a pretext
for cutting down the forests so where I
was in Laos it was completely standard
for the government to write contracts
for example for building a highway or
for building a new set of power lines it
could be an underground power line could
be a you know power line above ground
the companies doing that would often be
paid in lumber concessions so what this
means is instead of the government of
Laos paying them cash the government say
okay if you build this road for us or if
you build this power line for us we give
you the right to cut down so many
kilometers of forest along the route
where the power line is are along the
route where the road is going to be now
this leads to really horrible
consequences in public policy it leads
to people building roads they don't need
and building roads in the wrong places
because then the company has an
incentive not to build the road where
it's actually useful or necessary or
what have you but to build the road will
make them the most money and where it
will destroy the most old-growth forest
same for powerlines and I did see
specific examples of that there's one
example of a power plant project that
was going to destroy the only wild
elephant conservation habitat that they
had in all of Laos that I don't know if
they went ahead with that project I left
for her the end of that story it was
like okay why do you think they're
building the power line in exactly this
place because it's one of the last
places where the timber is really worth
a lot of money so naturally on the map
they're going to draw that line where it
makes the most money and not where it's
the easiest or most effective place to
install
power lines so you have first and if
you're talking about old-growth forests
and very often you're not very often you
talk about clearing one crop for another
you're talking about destroying rice
farms in order to plant rubber trees
because rubber trees are more profitable
than rice or it seems that way at the
moment or you're talking about
destroying tobacco plantations all these
places from tobacco because tobacco is
less and less profitable and people
think they can make more money at a palm
oil so it's very easy to misrepresent
the clearance of a tobacco land for palm
oil as if you're talking about cutting
down or growth for us when you're not
and a lot of these statistics do that in
a sense I don't blame them they're
making their argument and anyone can
read the fine print and figure out
what's really going on but if you think
that today in 2016 a country like
Malaysia or Laos just has doodles of
intact old-growth rainforest that's
being cut down to convert from one type
of crop that you're wrong you're
dreaming in a country like Laos a
country like Thailand you're already
talking about 99% deforestation and
we're really the only old-growth forest
is in protected areas is in national
parks so the type of ecological impact
er devastation of it is is different
okay finally I think that Lauren toward
the end of her video the vegan last
Lauren she she makes an argument that's
implicit in the earlier part of argument
that veganism is in her words quote
about doing the least harm possible and
it's not I actually disagree with that
I recorded a couple of podcasts on this
I think two different podcasts that went
to patreon in response to questions I
got from Jake Eames Jake Eames has
deleted his YouTube channel since then
which is a shame he had a couple of
really good videos um but Jake Eames
used to ask me a lot of questions along
these lines that isn't veganism about
doing as close to zero harm as possible
and Jake was worried about stuff like
plastic bottles right well you know is
it vegan is it ethical to be using
plastic bottles that end up either being
recycled or put in a landfill or
whatever I think it gets recycled does
it really get recycled after I part ways
this bottle who knows um I'd like to
imagine it actually gets recycled and it
goes into a recycling bin but I don't
know yeah there is real ecological harm
done by the use of plastic bottles
what's the substitute what's the
alternative
and what's the ethical decision for me
to make there is real or collage achill
harms done by taking airplanes airplane
transport is one of the most
ecologically harmful things you can do
in your life as a human being is it
worth it my life is actually not about
minimizing harm my life is about making
hard choices about doing harm about you
know committing to harm the environment
to harm the world to make the world a
worse place
in pursuit of positive goals in pursuit
of goals that I think may be worth it is
is it worthwhile for me to take an
airplane from Canada to China well if
it's from my own education I think the
answer is yes if it's actually study in
a university or teach in a university or
learn Chinese or learn something about
the ethnic minorities here the politics
the history etc obviously it could be
enormous ly rewarding you could be
talking about in my case one airplane
ticket in a year it does harm the
environment but I'm doing something
really that I think is meaningful and
important hypothetical example do I
actually believe that what I'm doing in
China right now is meaningful and
important I have a somewhat sardonic
attitude towards my my current
educational options as the how to know
the least awful of my options that were
open to me but I am learning a lot here
in China I'm not on vacation it is very
different ethically are you just taking
airplane trip for fun or they're real
outcomes are you pursuing a humanitarian
and eight are you running a charity
where you take a whole bunch of flights
but you're taking those flights to make
the world a better place you're using a
whole lot of plastic bottles but it's to
make the world a better place it's in
pursuit of some public policy goal some
political goal that's really worthwhile
uh real life is about exploiting
yourself and exploiting your environment
to try to accomplish something
meaningful and real and important and
there are real costs there are real
impacts that signs you can't mitigate
because there is no better substitute I
do not have a better alternative to you
then plastic bottles I don't I don't
have a better alternative to an airplane
I don't if there was one I'd take it if
I can take a blimp that has way less
impact in the environment it takes twice
as long I'd look at that if I could
afford it I actually do not have a
substitute for the airplane and when
things like palm oil when you look into
it are the substitutes really better
maybe maybe if you live in Canada you
can make the argument that canola oil
really is a morally superior substitute
DePalma I doubt it I doubt it I think
that the deforestation of Canada and the
exploitation of our land to produce
canola oil is probably just as
problematic as what you get with palm
oil I think he said canola oil is a type
of oil we grow in Canada rapeseed oil
etc I've never seen someone making these
arguments about palm oil by actually
extrapolating what the comparative costs
and impacts would be of using instead
rapeseed oil canola oil other types of
oil and that's exactly what you have to
do for the same reasons why with the
examples cigarette smoking you have to
look at the other causes of death the
other costs and what that means for the
government you have to look at you have
to put it in that comparative context to
make the argument there is a better
substitute available um with political
science ultimately it all comes down to
war and peace the costs and the impacts
of pursuing a war are unbelievably
terrible including ecologically um if
you think that governments fail to
conserve power or fail to conserve fuel
or gasoline when they you know and when
they generate electricity in peacetime
as soon as there's war involved the loss
of human life is tremendous but believe
me the waste of for example gasoline is
unbelievable and difficult to imagine
but if you make the decision yes we need
to pursue this war yes we need to win
this war for some incredibly more
the important reason then that is the
commitment you're making and so likewise
it's not about doing the least time
possible there's no way you can pursue a
war by saying well we're going to do the
least time possible going to use the
least gas think possible you're going to
look at you know the loss of human life
being minimized but all those other
considerations are going to fall by the
wayside naturally so the fundamental
question is positively what I'm trying
to accomplish is that worth it and then
you have to look at the impacts beneath
that if you are trying to accomplish
something positive in your life then
taking an airplane using a plastic
bottle or joining the army and fighting
a war those are all the kinds of hard
decisions you need to make it doesn't
mean that consumer choices are
meaningless as a vegan I think they're
tremendously meaningful I think that you
know substituting tofu for beef is a
tremendously meaningful tremendously
important thing for all of us to do in
our lives and that does stand up to
these tests these issues of
extrapolation of looking at you know the
whole life cycle every stage of the
supply chain what happens etc so there
are some decisions on life that are
tremendously meaningful however you know
most of us are not in a position to just
say well airplanes are bad for the
environment therefore I'm going to take
a boat I met a man who took a boat I
think he said it took more than three
months from Srilanka to Europe most of
us don't have the option of taking a
three month boat journey even though I
do believe if you scale it up the
ecological impact of millions of people
traveling by boat instead of by airplane
would be very positive right so what are
the real substitutions you can't make
what are the real moral options you have
and then you have to extrapolate for if
you take that substitute what are the
real impacts even with that boat the
boat is polluting the atmosphere much
less but on the other hand you're eating
three meals a day on a boat for three
months so there's an economic and
ecological impact just from the amount
of time and food you're passing by
taking this incredibly inefficient form
of transport even though doubtless you
know atmospheric emissions impact on the
Earth's upper atmosphere is much much
better with boat transport than by
airplane transport but we can
extrapolate if millions of people were
taking month long boat journeys instead
of airplane journeys that are only a
couple of hours what are the real
impacts of the whole
Rolle even for just all the food being
consumed on all those boats etc etc uh
life is messy life is full of hard
choices and that's why you need to focus
on the outcomes you're pursuing why are
you fighting the war why are you trying
to win the war what are the humanitarian
outcomes you're pursuing what are the
educational comes to pursuing what is
the type of human being you are trying
to become you need to focus on that and
not focus on just minimizing harm I
sympathize with both sides on this one
but I want to stay even more clearly
what my conclusion is here and why I'm
bothering to conclude it why I bother to
explain these things to you at such
great length altum Utley the product is
not what's for lunch the product is not
what's for dinner the product is you the
question is not what is the plastic
package snack you're going to buy today
the question is what kind of person are
you going to be what kind of person are
you going to become what kind of
difference are you aspiring to make in
the world and what are you willing to
sacrifice to make that happen in terms
of time money effort intelligence
suffering sorrow you name it I totally
sympathize with once you get into the
mentality of consumer activism once you
realize that the choices and what you
buy make a big difference that you
decide being vegan is not enough and
that you're also going to try to
eliminate palm oil and you're also going
to try to eliminate plastic and
unnecessary packaging and you're going
to try to eliminate plane tickets I
completely understand that I completely
sympathize with that because the people
who think that way like myself are on a
trajectory where they're trying to lead
a morally good life they're trying to
make a positive difference in the world
and trying to mitigate or minimize the
negative impacts that world I appreciate
that I sympathize with that but I think
you can fall into a trap and this very
commonly happens with people have more
of a spiritual background who maybe
approach veganism via Hinduism or via a
yoga mat Hinduism Hinduism message from
watered down and popularized among white
Western people it's really easy to fall
into a trap where you're just thinking
about personal purity and when you're
just thinking about minimizing harm and
what you need to do is take the naps
next step and not just think how can I
use
les you have to think about how can I
have the optimal outcomes impact how can
I make the most positive difference how
much am i using up is a question worth
asking and I ask myself that all the
time but what use am I putting myself to
what use am I putting this plane ticket
towards what use am i putting the food I
eat in the water I drink towards is
ultimately the much more meaningful
question because it comes pretty close
to the meaning of life itself you have
to be objective oriented you have to be
goal oriented and once you are thinking
in terms of those positive goals you're
trying to accomplish
I think it puts these problems like palm
oil into a very different perspective if
you want to deal with deforestation deal
with deforestation research
deforestation become an activist
involved in deforestation if you want to
deal with deforestation in Malaysia or
Laos or Cambodia or Thailand
then that's the issue that's what you
have to tackle that's what you have to
learn about and that's ultimately what
you have to get involved with and get
politically organized to make a
difference about whether you are a
scientist or you work at Starbucks or
you're studying language or art or
architecture whatever your situation is
in life if deforestation is the issue
then you look at your own life you look
at the tool kit you've got how you can
make a difference right
and yeah plastic bottles and what kind
of oil your snacks are made of those are
going to become relatively trivial
questions when you're on that road to
actually make that positive difference
don't start from the assumption that
you're a disempowered passive person it
were the only difference you can make is
through the choices you make as a
consumer
even though as vegans we tend to put
those consumer choices first and
foremost front and center because of the
emphasis we place on a course
eliminating meat and dairy from our
lives it's a trap it's a trap that a lot
of people don't realize they've fallen
into because you think I want to be good
I want to make a positive difference in
the world what you end up doing is
exclusively thinking in terms of a
negative difference in the world in
terms of what you eliminate from your
diet in terms of what you eliminate from
your consumption habits and instead what
you need
to get positively engaged with the real
issue whatever that issue is whether
that issue is orangutans and tigers and
elephants and preserving habitat for
them because ultimately that can only
come about through a positive change
through government programs or private
charity programs that should buy the
land and own and operate habitat
conservation agencies so that those
elephants tigers ranges have place to
live it's never going to come about
through simply reducing the oil in your
diet no matter what oil that is palm oil
otherwise it's never going to come about
by vegans deciding they can't buy rubber
because rubber plantations do eliminate
Tiger habitat also etc etc can never
come about through those merely negative
changes in your life it has to come
about through positive engagement the
first thing that happens is that
positive engagement is your own
education you learn how that's have
agriculture works how those types of
government policies work etc it said you
learn how you can and can't make a
difference in the world
and that positive engagement takes guts
it takes time it takes energy it's all
in another level from simply the
decisions you make every day at the
corner store and I encourage all of you
to take the time whether through Google
just sitting now on your living room
chair to learn more about these things
if you care to learn about where you can
and can't make a difference but at the
end of the day those are also part of
the hard decisions you have to make you
can't commit to every cause you can't
make every positive difference at some
point you have to draw the line in your
life and say okay I'm engaged with
humanitarian issues and deforestation
and Laos but not Malaysia and for
someone else is going to be Malaysia but
not Laos etc etc so those that's also in
the realm of those tough decisions you
get informed you get engaged you get
active but then you also choose what
issues you're going to remain ignorant
about you're going to remain disengaged
about where you can't possibly make a
difference the end of the day you got to
buy that ball water you got to waste
that plastic you got to burn that
airplane fuel because if you're
positively engaged in the world you
don't want to do it half-assed you don't
want to do it halfway you want to commit
to achieving those goals once you've
decided those goals are worthwhile we're
doing hypothetical scenario let's say 10
years from now I'm running for
Parliament in Canada for the Green Party
Green Party of Canada it's not
impossible ten years in the future I can
be running for Parliament am I going to
look at that prospect that
problem that situation in terms of how
can I minimize mycological impact how
can I have the smallest possible number
of airplane flights the smallest
possible number of kilometers when I
take that bus know I make the decision
first and foremost is this worth doing
or not if it's worth pursuing that goal
if it's worth taking the message of
ecology and veganism on the road from
town to town across Canada when I'm
running for Parliament then I'm going to
take the largest number of airplane
ticket spots we're going to burn through
all that jet fuel I'm going to go to a
de wapis cat and Hamilton and Vancouver
I'm going to go from coast to coast to
small towns in big cities and I'm going
to go out and talk to people and say hey
I'm running for Parliament I really want
you to hear this message and I want your
time and attention and your vote and
your money I want you to donate to me I
want you to hear me I want you to spread
this message because this message I've
got about ecology and veganism and
animal rights I think it's so important
that yes I committed to take all these
airplane tickets and burn through all
this jet fuel and I'm not doing it
halfway I'm not minimizing uh you know
the input I'm maximizing the output I'm
pursuing those real impacts as I've
already decided they're worth pursuing
and if they're not worth pursuing that's
when you make that decision is when you
say no this is a waste of my time so
waste of money and this is a waste of
jet fuel I'm not going to run for the
green and currently today that's the
decision I make but ten years from now
that's possible so don't sabotage
yourself don't sabotage your own
ambitions by looking at a scenario like
that and say oh well I'm going to run
this whole campaign for Parliament over
the internet so that I don't have to
take airplane flights I don't have to
really do a campaign know if those
objectives are worth pursuing then they
are definitely worth pursuing at that
cost and dealing with those costs and
taking more responsibility for the
damage done is part of being a grown-up
in the 21st century